``` 
  BIP: 84
  Layer: Applications
  Title: Derivation scheme for P2WPKH based accounts
  Author: Pavol Rusnak <stick@satoshilabs.com>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-0084
  Status: Draft
  Type: Informational
  Created: 2017-12-28
  License: CC0-1.0
```

## Abstract

This BIP defines the derivation scheme for HD wallets using the P2WPKH
([BIP 173](bip-0173.mediawiki "wikilink")) serialization format for
segregated witness transactions.

## Motivation

With the usage of P2WPKH transactions it is necessary to have a common
derivation scheme. It allows the user to use different HD wallets with
the same masterseed and/or a single account seamlessly.

Thus the user needs to create dedicated segregated witness accounts,
which ensures that only wallets compatible with this BIP will detect the
accounts and handle them appropriately.

### Considerations

We use the same rationale as described in Considerations section of [BIP
49](bip-0049.mediawiki "wikilink").

## Specifications

This BIP defines the two needed steps to derive multiple deterministic
addresses based on a [BIP 32](bip-0032.mediawiki "wikilink") root
account.

### Public key derivation

To derive a public key from the root account, this BIP uses the same
account-structure as defined in [BIP 44](bip-0044.mediawiki "wikilink")
and [BIP 49](bip-0049.mediawiki "wikilink"), but only uses a different
purpose value to indicate the different transaction serialization
method.

    m / purpose' / coin_type' / account' / change / address_index

For the `purpose`-path level it uses `84'`. The rest of the levels are
used as defined in BIP44 or BIP49.

### Address derivation

To derive the P2WPKH address from the above calculated public key, we
use the encapsulation defined in [BIP
141](bip-0141.mediawiki#p2wpkh "wikilink"):

`   witness:      `<signature>` `<pubkey>  
`   scriptSig:    (empty)`  
`   scriptPubKey: 0 <20-byte-key-hash>`  
`                 (0x0014{20-byte-key-hash})`

### Extended Key Version

When serializing extended keys, this scheme uses alternate version
bytes. Extended public keys use `0x04b24746` to produce a "zpub" prefix,
and private keys use `0x04b2430c` to produce a "zprv" prefix. Testnet
uses `0x045f1cf6` "vpub" and `0x045f18bc` "vprv."

Additional registered version bytes are listed in
[SLIP-0132](https://github.com/satoshilabs/slips/blob/master/slip-0132.md "wikilink").

## Backwards Compatibility

This BIP is not backwards compatible by design as described under
\[\#considerations\]. An incompatible wallet will not discover accounts
at all and the user will notice that something is wrong.

## Test vectors

``` 
  mnemonic = abandon abandon abandon abandon abandon abandon abandon abandon abandon abandon abandon about
  rootpriv = zprvAWgYBBk7JR8Gjrh4UJQ2uJdG1r3WNRRfURiABBE3RvMXYSrRJL62XuezvGdPvG6GFBZduosCc1YP5wixPox7zhZLfiUm8aunE96BBa4Kei5
  rootpub  = zpub6jftahH18ngZxLmXaKw3GSZzZsszmt9WqedkyZdezFtWRFBZqsQH5hyUmb4pCEeZGmVfQuP5bedXTB8is6fTv19U1GQRyQUKQGUTzyHACMF

  // Account 0, root = m/84'/0'/0'
  xpriv = zprvAdG4iTXWBoARxkkzNpNh8r6Qag3irQB8PzEMkAFeTRXxHpbF9z4QgEvBRmfvqWvGp42t42nvgGpNgYSJA9iefm1yYNZKEm7z6qUWCroSQnE
  xpub  = zpub6rFR7y4Q2AijBEqTUquhVz398htDFrtymD9xYYfG1m4wAcvPhXNfE3EfH1r1ADqtfSdVCToUG868RvUUkgDKf31mGDtKsAYz2oz2AGutZYs

  // Account 0, first receiving address = m/84'/0'/0'/0/0
  privkey = KyZpNDKnfs94vbrwhJneDi77V6jF64PWPF8x5cdJb8ifgg2DUc9d
  pubkey  = 0330d54fd0dd420a6e5f8d3624f5f3482cae350f79d5f0753bf5beef9c2d91af3c
  address = bc1qcr8te4kr609gcawutmrza0j4xv80jy8z306fyu

  // Account 0, second receiving address = m/84'/0'/0'/0/1
  privkey = Kxpf5b8p3qX56DKEe5NqWbNUP9MnqoRFzZwHRtsFqhzuvUJsYZCy
  pubkey  = 03e775fd51f0dfb8cd865d9ff1cca2a158cf651fe997fdc9fee9c1d3b5e995ea77
  address = bc1qnjg0jd8228aq7egyzacy8cys3knf9xvrerkf9g

  // Account 0, first change address = m/84'/0'/0'/1/0
  privkey = KxuoxufJL5csa1Wieb2kp29VNdn92Us8CoaUG3aGtPtcF3AzeXvF
  pubkey  = 03025324888e429ab8e3dbaf1f7802648b9cd01e9b418485c5fa4c1b9b5700e1a6
  address = bc1q8c6fshw2dlwun7ekn9qwf37cu2rn755upcp6el
```

## Reference

  - [BIP32 - Hierarchical Deterministic
    Wallets](bip-0032.mediawiki "wikilink")
  - [BIP43 - Purpose Field for Deterministic
    Wallets](bip-0043.mediawiki "wikilink")
  - [BIP44 - Multi-Account Hierarchy for Deterministic
    Wallets](bip-0044.mediawiki "wikilink")
  - [BIP49 - Derivation scheme for P2WPKH-nested-in-P2SH based
    accounts](bip-0049.mediawiki "wikilink")
  - [BIP141 - Segregated Witness (Consensus
    layer)](bip-0141.mediawiki "wikilink")
  - [BIP173 - Base32 address format for native v0-16 witness
    outputs](bip-0173.mediawiki "wikilink")
