``` 
  BIP: 322
  Layer: Applications
  Title: Generic Signed Message Format
  Author: Karl-Johan Alm <karljohan-alm@garage.co.jp>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-0322
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2018-09-10
  License: CC0-1.0
```

## Abstract

A standard for interoperable signed messages based on the Bitcoin Script
format, either for proving fund availability, or committing to a message
as the intended recipient of funds sent to the invoice address.

## Motivation

The current message signing standard only works for P2PKH (1...) invoice
addresses. We propose to extend and generalize the standard by using a
Bitcoin Script based approach. This approach minimizes the burden for
implementers as message signing can be expected to be part of a library
or project that includes Bitcoin Script interpreters already.

Additionally, the current message signing only proves that the message
has been committed to by the recipient of a given invoice address. It
does not prove anything about the invoice address itself, nor that the
signer has access to the private keys used to implement this invoice.
More importantly, it does not prove ownership nor access to any funds,
even if the same private key would be a valid signer for spending them -
and this is a commonly desired use case.

## Specification

This BIP follows the specification of BIP-325 challenges and solutions
(see Signet comparison below).

Let there be two virtual transactions to\_spend and to\_sign.

The "to\_spend" transaction is:

`   nVersion = 0`  
`   nLockTime = 0`  
`   vin[0].prevout.hash = 0000...000`  
`   vin[0].prevout.n = 0xFFFFFFFF`  
`   vin[0].nSequence = 0`  
`   vin[0].scriptSig = OP_0 PUSH32[ message_hash ]`  
`   vin[0].scriptWitness = []`  
`   vout[0].nValue = 0`  
`   vout[0].scriptPubKey = message_challenge`

where message\_hash is a BIP340-tagged hash of the message, i.e.
sha256\_tag(m), where tag = "BIP0322-signed-message", and
message\_challenge is the to be proven (public) key script. For proving
funds, message\_challenge shall be simply OP\_TRUE.

The "to\_sign" transaction is:

`   nVersion = 0 or as appropriate (e.g. 2, for time locks)`  
`   nLockTime = 0 or as appropriate (for time locks)`  
`   vin[0].prevout.hash = to_spend.txid`  
`   vin[0].prevout.n = 0`  
`   vin[0].nSequence = 0 or as appropriate (for time locks)`  
`   vin[0].scriptWitness = message_signature`  
`   vout[0].nValue = 0`  
`   vout[0].scriptPubKey = OP_RETURN`

When a proof of funds is being created, additional inputs should be
included for virtually spending transaction outputs of desired value.

  - All signatures must use the SIGHASH\_ALL flag.
  - The proof is considered valid, inconclusive, or invalid based on
    whether the to\_sign transaction is a valid spend of the to\_spend
    transaction or not, according to the rules specified in the
    "Consensus and standard flags" section below.
  - Proofs of funds may be encumbered with the in\_future flag,
    according to the rules specified in the "Locktime and Sequence"
    section below, in which case we refer to the result in text form as
    "valid\_in\_future", "inconclusive\_in\_future", etc.

Proofs of funds are the base64-encoding of the to\_spend and to\_sign
transactions concatenated in standard network serialisation, and proofs
without additional inputs or time locks (simple proofs) are the
base64-encoding of the to\_sign script witness.

A validator must verify it is valid and meets the description of virtual
transactions as specified above. See "Validation" below.

### Validation

To validate a simple proof, the following steps must be taken:

1.  construct the to\_spend and to\_sign transactions, based on the
    specification above
2.  check the signature using consensus rules, then upgradable rules

To validate a proof of funds, the following steps must be taken:

1.  deserialize the to\_spend and to\_sign transactions from the proof,
    and fail if the proof contains extraneous bytes
2.  verify that the to\_sign transaction uses all inputs covered by the
    proof of funds, exactly once
3.  reconstruct the to\_spend' and to\_sign' transactions, based on the
    specification above, copying the version, lock time, and sequence
    values
4.  verify that to\_spend = to\_spend', that to\_sign has at least 1
    input, has exactly 1 output, and that to\_sign.vin\[0\] =
    to\_sign'.vin\[0\]
5.  set the "in\_future" flag if the transaction's lock time is in the
    future according to consensus rules
6.  establish a "coins map", a mapping of outpoints (hash, vout) to
    coins (scriptPubKey, amount), initialized to
    coins\_map(to\_spend.txid, 0) = (to\_spend.vout\[0\], 0)
7.  for each proof of fund input, set the corresponding values in the
    coins map; abort if the input cannot be found
8.  check the signature of each input using consensus rules, then
    upgradable rules

## Legacy format

New proofs should use the new format for all invoice address formats,
including P2PKH.

The legacy format MAY be used, but must be restricted to the legacy
P2PKH invoice address format.

### Signing

Given the P2PKH invoice address `a` and the message `m`, and the
pubkey-hash function `pkh(P) = ripemd160(sha256(P))`:

1.  let `p` be the pubkey-hash `pkh(P)` for the pubkey `P`, contained in
    `a`
2.  let `x` be the private key associated with `P` so that `pkh(xG) = p`
3.  let `digest` be ` SHA56d(0x18||"Bitcoin Signed
     `<Message:\n>`"||compactint(len(m))||m)`
4.  create a compact signature `sig` (aka "recoverable ECDSA signature")
    using `x` on `digest`

The resulting proof is `sig`, serialized using the base64 encoding.

### Verifying

Given the P2PKH invoice address `a`, the message `m`, the compact
signature `sig`, and the pubkey-hash function `pkh(P) =
ripemd160(sha256(P))`:

1.  let `p` be the pubkey-hash `pkh(P)` for the pubkey `P`, contained in
    `a`
2.  let `digest` be ` SHA56d(0x18||"Bitcoin Signed
     `<Message:\n>`"||compactint(len(m))||m)`
3.  attempt pubkey recovery for `digest` using the signature `sig` and
    store the resulting pubkey into `Q`
    1.  fail verification if pubkey recovery above fails
4.  let `q` be the pubkey-hash `pkh(Q)` for the pubkey `Q`
5.  if `p == q`, the proof is valid, otherwise it is invalid

## Compatibility

This specification is backwards compatible with the legacy
signmessage/verifymessage specification through the special case as
described above.

## Reference implementation

TODO

## Acknowledgements

Thanks to David Harding, Jim Posen, Kalle Rosenbaum, Pieter Wuille, and
many others for their feedback on the specification.

## References

1.  Original mailing list thread:
    <https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2018-March/015818.html>

## Copyright

This document is licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal
license.

## Consensus and standard flags

Each flag is associated with some type of enforced rule (most often a
soft fork). There are two sets of flags: consensus flags (which result
in a block being rejected, if violated), and upgradable flags (which are
typically policy-rejected by nodes specifically for the purpose of
future network upgrades). The upgradable flags are a super-set of the
consensus flags.

This BIP specifies that a proof that validates for both rulesets is
valid, a proof that validates for consensus rules, but not for
upgradable rules, is "inconclusive", and a proof that does not validate
for consensus rules is "invalid" (regardless of upgradable rule
validation).

The ruleset sometimes changes. This BIP does not intend to be complete,
nor does it indicate enforcement of rules, it simply lists the rules as
they stand at the point of writing.

### Consensus rules

  - P2SH: evaluate P2SH
    ([BIP16](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0016.mediawiki))
    subscripts
  - DERSIG: enforce strict DER
    ([BIP66](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0066.mediawiki))
    compliance
  - NULLDUMMY: enforce NULLDUMMY
    ([BIP147](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0147.mediawiki))
  - CHECKLOCKTIMEVERIFY: enable CHECKLOCKTIMEVERIFY
    ([BIP65](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0065.mediawiki))
  - CHECKSEQUENCEVERIFY: enable CHECKSEQUENCEVERIFY
    ([BIP112](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0112.mediawiki))
  - WITNESS: enable WITNESS
    ([BIP141](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0141.mediawiki))

### Upgradable rules

All of the above, plus (subject to change):

  - STRICTENC: non-strict DER signature or undefined hashtype
  - MINIMALDATA: require minimal encodings for all push operations
  - DISCOURAGE\_UPGRADABLE\_NOPS: discourage use of NOPs reserved for
    upgrades
  - CLEANSTACK: require that only a single stack element remains after
    evaluation
  - MINIMALIF: Segwit script only: require the argument of OP\_IF/NOTIF
    to be exactly 0x01 or empty vector
  - NULLFAIL: signature(s) must be empty vector if a CHECK(MULTI)SIG
    operation failed
  - LOW\_S: signature with S \> order/2 in a checksig operation
  - DISCOURAGE\_UPGRADABLE\_WITNESS\_PROGRAM: v1-16 witness programs are
    non-standard (i.e. forbidden)
  - WITNESS\_PUBKEYTYPE: public keys in segregated witness scripts must
    be compressed
  - CONST\_SCRIPTCODE: OP\_CODESEPARATOR and FindAndDelete fail any
    non-segwit scripts

## Test vectors

TODO
