``` 
  BIP: 100
  Layer: Consensus (hard fork)
  Title: Dynamic maximum block size by miner vote
  Author: Jeff Garzik <jgarzik@gmail.com>
          Tom Harding <tomh@thinlink.com>
          Dagur Valberg Johannsson <dagurval@pvv.ntnu.no>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-0100
  Status: Rejected
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2015-06-11
  License: BSD-2-Clause
```

## Abstract

Replace the static 1M block size hard limit with a hard limit set by
coinbase vote, conducted on the same schedule as difficulty retargeting.

## Motivation

Miners directly feel the effects, both positive and negative, of any
maximum block size change imposed by their peers. Larger blocks allow
more growth in the on-chain ecosystem, while smaller blocks reduce
resource requirements network-wide. Miners also act as an efficient
proxy for the rest of the ecosystem, since they are paid in the tokens
collected for the blocks they create.

A simple deterministic system is specified, whereby a 75% mining
supermajority may activate a change to the maximum block size each 2016
blocks. Each change is limited to a 5% increase from the previous block
size hard limit, or a decrease of similar magnitude. Among adopting
nodes, there will be no disagreement on the evolution of the maximum
block size.

The system is compatible with emergent consensus, but whereas under that
system a miner may choose to accept any size block, a miner following
BIP100 observes the 75% supermajority rule, and the 5% change limit
rule. Excessive-block values signaled by emergent consensus blocks are
considered in the calculation of the BIP100 block size hard limit, and
the BIP100 calculated maximum block size is signaled as an
excessive-block value for the benefit of all observers.

## Specification

### Dynamic Maximum Block Size

1.  Initial value of `hardLimit` is 1000000 bytes, preserving current
    system.
2.  Changing `hardLimit` is accomplished by encoding a proposed value, a
    vote, within a block's coinbase scriptSig, and by processing the
    votes contained in the previous retargeting period.  
      
    \# Vote encoding
    1.  1.  A vote is represented as a megabyte value using the BIP100
            pattern  
              
            `/BIP100/B[0-9]+/`  
              
            Example: `/BIP100/B8/` is a vote for a 8000000-byte
            `hardLimit`.  
              
        2.  If the block height is encoded at the start of the coinbase
            scriptSig, as per BIP34, it is ignored.
        3.  Only the first BIP100 pattern match is processed in "Maximum
            block size recalculation" below.
        4.  A megabyte value is represented by consecutive base-ten
            digits.
        5.  If no BIP100 pattern is matched, the first matching emergent
            consensus pattern `/EB[0-9]+/`, if any, is accepted as the
            megabyte vote.  
              
    
    2.  Maximum block size recalculation
        
        1.  A `new hardLimit` is calculated after each difficulty
            adjustment period of 2016 blocks, and applies to the next
            2016 blocks.
        2.  Absent/zero-valued votes are counted as votes for the
            `current hardLimit`.
        3.  The votes of the previous 2016 blocks are sorted by megabyte
            vote.
        4.  Raising `hardLimit`  
              
            \# The `raise value` is defined as the vote of the 1512th
            highest block, converted to bytes.
            1.  If the resultant `raise value` is greater than (`current
                hardLimit` \* 1.05) rounded down, it is set to that
                value.
            2.  If the resultant `raise value` is greater than `current
                hardLimit`, the `raise value` becomes the `new
                hardLimit` and the recalculation is complete.  
                  
        5.  Lowering `hardLimit`  
              
            \# The `lower value` is defined as the vote of the 1512th
            lowest block, converted to bytes.
            1.  If the resultant `lower value` is less than (`current
                hardLimit` / 1.05) rounded down, it is set to that
                value.
            2.  If the resultant `lower value` is less than `current
                hardLimit`, the `lower value` becomes the `new
                hardLimit` and the recalculation is complete.  
                  
        6.  Otherwise, `new hardLimit` remains the same as `current
            hardLimit`.

### Signature Hashing Operations Limits

1.  The per-block signature hashing operations limit is scaled to
    (actual block size, fractional megabyte rounded to next higher
    megabyte) / 50.
2.  A maximum serialized transaction size of 1000000 bytes is imposed.

## Recommendations

### Publication of `hardLimit`

1.  For the benefit of all observers, it is recommended that `hardLimit`
    be published. Example: a complete coinbase string might read  
      
    `/BIP100/B8/EB2.123456/`  
      
    which indicates a vote for 8M maximum block size, and an enforced
    `hardLimit` of 2.123456 megabytes for the block containing the
    coinbase string.

## Deployment

This BIP is presumed deployed and activated as of block height 449568 by
implementing nodes on the bitcoin mainnet. It has no effect until a
raise value different from 1M is observed, which requires at least 1512
of 2016 blocks to vote differently from 1M.

## Backward compatibility

The first block larger than 1M will create a network partition, as nodes
with a fixed 1M hard limit reject that block.

## Implementations

<https://github.com/bitcoinxt/bitcoinxt/pull/188></br>
<https://github.com/bitcoinxt/bitcoin/pull/1></br>
<https://github.com/BitcoinUnlimited/BitcoinUnlimited/pull/398></br>

## Copyright

This document is licensed under the BSD 2-clause license.
